LINE UP AT THE BOX OFFICE TO SEE
"THE INTERVIEW" THIS CHRISTMAS,
OR STREAM IT FROM THE COMFORT OF
THEIR HOMES, WE TAKE A LOOK AT
HOW THE MOVIE'S RELEASE CAME TO
HAPPEN.
GOOD EVENING, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
GWEN IFILL AND JUDY WOODRUFF ARE
AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD:
AS POPE FRANCIS CALLS FOR PEACE
IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND BEYOND IN
HIS ANNUAL CHRISTMAS ADDRESS,
SOME INSIGHT INTO HOW HIS EARLY
LIFE SHAPED THE OUTLOOK OF THIS
REFORMER.
PLUS, AS COMMON CORE TRIES TO
STAY AFLOAT IN STORMY WATERS,
WHAT PRINCIPLES ARE SOME STATES
TOSSING OVERBOARD, AND WHAT CAN
BE SALVAGED?
>> THE STATES ARE NERVOUS.
ANYTIME MORE KIDS DON'T MEET THE
PROFICIENCY MARK, IT'S VERY
DIFFICULT FOR STATES.
THEY HAVE TO TELL PEOPLE, ARE
OUR KIDS GETTING DUMBER?
WHY ARE OUR KIDS NOT PERFORMING
WELL?
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE ARE SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS CHRISTMAS
BROUGHT ALL THE TRADITIONAL
CELEBRATIONS OF THE DAY, BUT
ALONG WITH THEM, NEW CALLS FOR
AN END TO SUFFERING.
THE MOST ARDENT OF THOSE APPEALS
CAME FROM THE VATICAN.
THE CROWDS WHO FILLED ST.
PETER'S SQUARE HEARD A HOLIDAY
LAMENT FROM POPE FRANCIS.
"THERE ARE SO MANY TEARS THIS
CHRISTMAS," HE SAID-- THE
RAVAGES OF EBOLA, FIGHTING IN
AND TERROR AACKSTT, LIKE THE ONE
THAT KILLED SCORES OF STUDENTS
IN PAKISTAN.
AND, HE DECRIED THE PERSECUTION
OF CHRISTIANS AND OTHERS BY
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
>> ( translated ): I ASK HIM,
THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD, TO LOOK
UPON OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA, WHO FOR TOO LONG
NOW HAVE SUFFERED THE EFFECTS OF
ONGOING CONFLICT, AND WHO,
TOGETHER WITH THOSE BELONGING TO
OTHER ETHNIC AND RELIGIOUS
GROUPS, ARE SUFFERING A BRUTAL
PERSECUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT MANY OF
THOSE BESET BY STRIFE, INCLUDING
REFUGEES IN IRAQ, STILL FOUND
WAYS TO CELEBRATE.
AND HEALTH CARE WORKERS IN
SIERRA LEONE BROUGHT WHAT CHEER
THEY COULD TO EBOLA PATIENTS,
DESPITE A GOVERNMENT BAN ON
PUBLIC CELEBRATIONS.
MEANWHILE, CHRISTMAS IN CUBA
TOOK ON A NEW AIR OF HOPE THAT
RENEWED RELATIONS WITH THE U.S.
WILL CHANGE LIVES.
>> ( translated ): IT IS A GIFT,
IT REALLY IS A GIFT.
I HOPE EVERYTHING WORKS OUT IN
THE BEST POSSIBLE WAY BECAUSE IT
WOULD BRING A LOT OF BENEFITS TO
WORK IN BETTER CONDITIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN LONDON, QUEEN
ELIZABETH TOOK UP A SIMILAR
THEME WITH HER OWN ANNUAL
MESSAGE TO THE WORLD.
>> EVEN IN THE UNLIKELIEST OF
PLACES HOPE CAN STILL BE FOUND.
A VERY HAPPY CHRISTMAS TO YOU
ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: IT WAS A
SENTIMENT THAT ECHOED HIGH INTO
THE HEAVENS.
>> HELLO!
FROM THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE
STATION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHERE ASTRONAUTS
BARRY WILMORE AND TERRY VIRTS
SHARED SEASON'S GREETINGS, A
MINIATURE FLOATING CHRISTMAS
TREE.
AND, THIS IMAGE OF A CELESTIAL
SUNRISE ON CHRISTMAS MORNING.
BACK ON EARTH, SOME OF THE MORE
UNUSUAL TRADITIONS PLAYED OUT,
AS MEMBERS OF THE BERLIN SEALS
WINTER SWIMMING CLUB TOOK THEIR
ANNUAL CHRISTMAS DAY PLUNGE INTO
A FREEZING LAKE.
CHRISTMAS EVE BROUGHT A SECOND
NIGHT OF PROTESTS IN BERKELEY,
MISSOURI.
A NIGHT EARLIER, A BLACK 18-
YEAR-OLD WAS SHOT DEAD BY A
POLICE OFFICER AFTER HE
ALLEGEDLY PULLED A HANDGUN.
LAST NIGHT, DEMONSTRATORS
MARCHED DOWN INTERSTATE 170,
BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
THEY ALSO HELD A VIGIL AND
STAGED A DIE-IN AT THE GAS
STATION WHERE THE SHOOTING TOOK
PLACE.
POLICE SAY THEY MADE A HANDFUL
OF ARRESTS.
THE LOSS OF A JORDANIAN MILITARY
PILOT IN SYRIA PROMPTED APPEALS
FROM HIS GOVERNMENT AND FAMILY
FOR HIS SAFE RETURN TODAY.
HE WENT DOWN YESTERDAY, IN A
REGION CONTROLLED BY ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTERS.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAID HIS PLANE
CRASHED AND WAS  NOT  HIT BY
ENEMY FIRE.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM NELAFUR
HEDAYAT OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Reporter: CAPTURED BY
ISLAMIC STATE, THE FIRST
U.S.-LED COALITION SOLDIER IN
THE HANDS OF THE TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION.
26-YEAR-OLD MU'ATH SAFI YOUSEF
AL-KASEASBEH, A JORDANIAN PILOT,
WAS CAPTURED BY I.S. AFTER HIS
F-16 FIGHTER JET CRASHED.
INITIALLY, ISLAMIC STATE CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR SHOOTING THE
JET DOWN, CELEBRATING WITH A
MACABRE VICTORY PARADE THROUGH
THE STREET.
NONE OF THIS MATTERS MUCH TO
LT. MU'ATH SAFI YOUSEF
AL-KASEASBEH.
ISLAMIC STATE ARE WELL KNOWN FOR
BRUTAL TREATMENT AND BEHEADING
OF THE CAPTIVES.
TODAY HIS FATHER YOUSSEF
AL-KASAEBEH HAS ADDED TO THE
MANY VOICES PLEADING FOR MU'ATH
SAFI YOUSEF AL-KASEASBEH TO BE
RELEASED UNHARMED.
>> I SENT A MESSAGE TO THE
BROTHERS IN SYRIA TO BE GENEROUS
TOWARD MY SON.
I ASKED GOD TO FILL THEIR HEARTS
WITH LOVE AND TO RETURN HIM HOME
IN SAFETY.
>> Reporter: MU'ATH SAFI
YOUSEF AL-KASEASBEH HAS BEEN A
PILOT FOR THE JORDANIAN AIR
FORCE SIX YEARS.
JORDANIAN AIR FORCE HAVE JOINED
OTHER STATES FORMING THE
40-STRONG COALITION.
>> CONTINUING THE FIGHT AGAINST
TERRORISM AND WE KNOW THAT WE
WILL WIN BECAUSE THIS IS THE
RIGHT THING TO DO FOR THE SAKE
OF OUR SECURITY AND STABILITY OF
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: U.S.-LED CAMPAIGN
AGAINST I.S. STARTED BACK IN
SEPTEMBER.
THIS MONTH, AIR STRIKES HAVE
BEEN INTENSIFYING AS THE MISSION
TO DEGRADE AND DESTROY ISLAMIC
STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA
CONTINUES.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST TIME A
PILOT
COALITION HS BEEN CAPTURED.
SO FAR, THERE HAVE BEEN NO
PUBLIC DEMANDS OR CONDITIONS SET
FOR HIS RELEASE.
ISLAMIST GUNMEN IN SOMALIA
ATTACKED THE MAIN BASE OF
AFRICAN UNION PEACEKEEPERS
TODAY.
THE AL-SHABAB MILITANTS STRUCK
IN MOGADISHU, THE CAPITAL CITY.
AN A.U. MILITARY SPOKESMAN SAID
EIGHT OF THE ATTACKERS WERE
KILLED IN THE RESULTING GUN
BATTLE.
AL-SHABAB CONTROLLED MUCH OF
MOGADISHU FOR FOUR YEARS, UNTIL
2011, WHEN THE PEACEKEEPERS
DROVE THEM OUT.
AND IN INDONESIA TODAY,
THOUSANDS REMEMBERED A DAY OF
SASTDIER.
TEN YEARS AGO TOMORROW A
CATASTROPHIC TSUNAMI KILLED
NEARLY SOME 230,000 PEOPLE IN 14
COUNTRIES, MOST OF THEM IN
INDONESIA.
TODAY, A CHURCH IN BANDA ACEH, A
CITY THAT WAS ALL BUT WIPED OUT
BY THE GIANT WAVE, HELD A
SPECIAL CHRISTMAS SERVICE.
AND, THOUSANDS FLOCKED TO A
MOSQUE THAT WAS ONE OF THE FEW
BUILDINGS TO SURVIVE.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
INSIDE T PUSHEH TO BRING "THE
INTERVIEW" TO A THEATER, OR
COMPUTER, NEAR YOU.
A MOVEMENT TO PREVENT
PROSPECTIVE EMPLOYERS FROM
ASKING ABOUT CONVICTIONS.
HOW POPE FRANCIS CULTIVATED HIS
POPULIST APPEAL.
RELIGION, THE OTHER FRONT IN THE
UKRAINE-RUSSIA CONFLICT.
THE BACKLASH AGAINST COMMON
CORE, AS STATES PICK AND CHOOSE
WHAT ELEMENTS TO KEEP.
AND, WALKING THE FINE LINE
BETWEEN ENJOYING OUR NATIONAL
TREASURES AND ABUSING THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: LESS THAN A WEEK
AGO, SONY INDICATED THAT UNDER
PRESSURE OF THREATS, THE
MOVIEGOING PUBLIC WAS NOT GOING
TO BE ABLE TO SEE THE COMEDY,
"THE INTERVIEW" AT A THEATER
TODAY.
BUT THAT DECISION HIT QUICKLY ON
A TRIPWIRE OF CRITICISMS ABOUT
GEOPOLITICS, FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION, TERRORISM AND MORE.
AND IN A QUICK REVERSAL OF
FORTUNE, THE MOVIE OPENED IN
MORE THAN 300 LOCATIONS TODAY,
MOSTLY AT SMALL, INDEPENDENT ART
HOUSE THEATERS.
>> CHRISTMAS DAY IS USUALLY A
BUSY DAY FOR THE MOVIES, BUT
THIS IS UNLIKE ANYTHING WE'VE
EXPERIENCE BEFORE.
>> SCREENINGS, THE FILM WAS
SELLING OUT AT SMALLER THEATERS.
CO-STAR AND CO-DIRECTOR SETH
ROGEN MADE A SURPRISE APPEARANCE
AT A MIDNIGHT SCREENING IN LOS
ANGELES.
>> WE THOUGHT THIS MIGHT NEVER
HAPPEN AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA,
WHO WAS ON VACATION IN HAWAII
AND CRITICIZED SONS INY'ITIAL
DECISION, WOULDN'T SAY IF HE
WOULD WATCH IT, BUT HE SAID,
>> I'M GLAD IT'S BEING RELEASED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE RELEASE OF
THE COMEDY, ABOUT A C.I.A. PLOT
TO ASSASSINATE NORTH KOREAN
LEADER KIM JONG UN, WAS CANCELED
LAST WEEK AFTER HACKERS
THREATENED POTENTIAL ATTACKS AT
THEATERS.
THE PRESIDENT HAS SAID NORTH
KOREA IS BEHIND THE HACKING OF
SONY.
MOVIEGOERS WERE OUT EARLY AT
WASHINGTON, D.C.'S WEST END
CINEMAS.
INCLUDING MOHAMMED SHOUMAN.
>> I DECIDED TO SHOW MY PERSONAL
SUPPORT FOR THEATERS THAT SHOW
IT AND MY PERSONAL SUPPORT FOR
FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
>> Sreenivasan: SARAH ARLINGHAUS
ADMITTED THE ROGEN/FRANCO STYLE
WAS NOT HER USUAL MOVIE FARE.
>> I WOULDN'T HAVE SEEN IT IF
THE NORTH KOREANS HADN'T DECIDED
I SHOULDN'T SEE IT.
I WOULD LIKE TO SIT NEAR THE
EXITS JUST IN CASE WE HAVE TO
EVACUATE ICKLQUY.
>> Sreenivasan: "THE INTERVIEW"
IS ALSO AVAILABLE AS VIDEO ON
DEMAND.
IT CAN BE SEEN ON GOOGLE PLAY,
YOUTUBE MOVIES, AND MICROSOFT'S
XBOX.
STILL, BEFORE MAJOR EXHIBITORS
PULLED OUT, THE MOVIE WAS
ORIGINALLY SCHEDULED TO PLAY IN
3,000 THEATERS.
ARTHOUSE CONVERGENCE, A
COALITION OF ABOUT 250
INDEPENDENT THEATERS, WROTE AN
OPEN LETTER TO SONY EARLIER THIS
WEEK OFFERING TO SHOW THE MOVIE.
I SPOKE TO THE GROUP'S DIRECTOR,
RUSS COLLINS, YESTERDAY IN ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN, WHERE HE ALSO
RUNS THE STATE THEATER THAT'S
SHOWING IT TODAY.
RUSS COLLINS, WHY DID SO MANY OF
THE MEMBERS OF YOUR
ORGANIZATION, THE INDEPENDENT
THEATERS, DECIDE TO RUN THIS
MOVIE?
>> THERE WERE TWO REASONS.
ONE, WE INITIALLY REACHED OUT TO
THE EMPLOYEES AND THE SONY
CORPORATION, BUT THEIR EMPLOYEES
IN PARTICULAR, THE FOLKS WHO WE
HAVE THE INTERFACE WITH, JUST TO
EXPRESS OUR EMPATHY PORE THE
DIFFICULTIES THAT THEY'VE
ENCOUNTERED THE LAST MONTH AFTER
THEIR COMPANY WAS HACKED AND
THEIR E-MAILS WENT DOWN AND
THEIR TELEPHONE WENT DOWN AND
ALL OF THE RECORDS WENT DOWN,
IT'S JUST BEEN A VERY, VERY
DIFFICULT TIME FOR SONY
EMPLOYEES.
WE WANTED TO EXPRESS HOW WE FELT
AND THAT WE WANTED TO SUPPORT
THEM AND ONE OF THE WAYS WE
COULD SUPPORT THEM IS IF SONY
DECIDED TO RELEASE THE
INTERVIEW, WE AS INDEPENDENT
THEATERS WOULD BE WILLING TO
SCREEN THAT, OR AT LEAST WE
THOUGHT WE MIGHT.
WHEN THE WORD GOT OUT AMONG THE
ART HOUSE CONVERGENCE GROUP THAT
THIS MIGHT BE A POSSIBILITY OR
SOMETHING THAT WE COULD OFFER,
THEY WERE ENTHUSIASTIC IN THEIR
RESPONSE, AND IT JUST KIND OF
TOOK OFF FROM THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: NO DISRESPECT
BUT A SETH ROGEN MOVIE AND R.
HOUSE CONVERGENCE GROUP DON'T
USUALLY GO IN THE SAME SENTENCE.
THIS ISN'T USUALLY THE FARE OF
INDEPENDENT MOVIE HOUSE.
>> THAT'S TRUE.
INDEPENDENT MOVIE HOUSES ARE
DEDICATED TO DIVERSITY OF
PROGRAM, DOCUMENTARIES,
INDEPENDENT AMERICAN FILMS,
CLASSIC FILMS, BUT WE'RE ALSO
STRONGLY COMMITTED TO FREEDOM OF
SPEECH AND ARTISTIC EXPRESSION
DYNAMICS.
ART HOUSES DO THIS ON A REGULAR
BASIS.
WHEN THIS PARTICULAR EXHIBITION
BECAME A FREEDOM OF SPEECH
ISSUE, IT ALIGNED WITH THE
VALUES OF INDEPENDENT THEATERS,
MAKING THE OFFERS WORK WITH OUR
VALUES AND OUR CAPABILITIES AND
THE DIVERSITY OF THE PROGRAMS
AND FACILITIES AND LOCATIONS
THAT ARE OUT THERE IN NORTH
AMERICA FOR INDEPENDENT CINEMA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ONE OF THE
THINGS PEOPLE MIGHT BE THINKING
ABOUT WHETHER THEY'RE GOING TO
SEE THIS MOVIE AT ONE OF YOUR
THEATERS OR A DIFFERENT ONE, ARE
THERE ADDITIONAL SAFETY
PRECAUTIONS YOU'RE TAKING INTO
CONSIDERATION?
>> WE'RE ENCOURAGING EACH
THEATER TO CONSULT WITH LOCAL
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS, HAVE
THE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS
WORK THEIR CHANNELS TO SEE IF
THERE IS ANY CONCERNS.
IN OUR PARTICULAR CASE, THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN HAS A
KOREAN STUDIES PROGRAM AND WE
CONTACTED THEM TO GET THEIR
INPUT.
SO WE ARE OUT THERE CONCERNED
AND VIGILANT ABOUT SEEKING ANY
UNUSUAL TELEMETRY ABOUT UNUSUAL
BEHAVIOR.
SO FAR WE HAVEN'T ENCOUNTERED
ANY, AT LEAST IN OUR PARTICULAR
MARKET, BUT I'M SURE THEATERS
ARE GOING TO DO WHAT THEY NEED
TO DO TO ASSURE THAT THEIR
CUSTOMERS AND THEIR EMPLOYEES
ARE SAFE AT THESE SCREENINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'VE SEEN
REPORTS THAT SOME SCREENINGS OF
THIS MOVIE ARE SELLING OUT.
I LOOK AT SOME OF THE WEB SITES
LIKE ROTTEN TOMATOES AND SO
FORTH AND IT'S NOT PARTICULARLY
BECAUSE THIS MOVIE IS
OSCAR-WORTHY TO PUT IT MILDLY,
DO YOU THINK IT'S BECAUSE OF THE
PUBLICITY IN IT THAT PEOPLE ARE
ATTRACTED TO THIS?
>> I THINK THERE IS TWO REASONS.
ONE IS WHEN THE INITIAL RELEASE
WAS PLANNED, THEY LOOKED TO
SCREEN IT AT TWO TO THREE TO
4,000 SCREENS.
THE WAY IT'S TURNING OUT, IT'S
GOING TO BE 200 OR 300 SCREENS
THAT ARE ACTUALLY SHOWING "THE
INTERVIEW."
OBVIOUSLY, ALL OF THE NATIONAL
PRESS THAT'S OCCURRED AND ALL OF
THE ISSUES ABOUT THE FILM HAVE
RESONATED A PARTICULAR INTEREST
IN THE NOTION OF THE FILM AND
THE DIFFICULTIES SONY ENCOUNTER.
SO I THINK THERE'S A LOT OF
CURIOSITY.
IS CURIOSITY WILL BE SATIATED
QUICKLY AND THE FILM WILL HAVE A
LONG LIFE BASED ON HOW IT'S
RECEIVED BY AUDIENCES.
>> Sreenivasan: DO YOU SEE
THIS AS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MORE
PEOPLE TO REINTRODUCE THEMSELVES
TO THE INDEPENDENT OR SMALL
THEATERS IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS
VERSUS THE BIG CHAINS THAT
USUALLY RUN A MOVIE LIKE THIS?
>> YES, INDEPENDENT THEATERS,
ART HOUSES ARE OUT THERE ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY.
THE OBJECTIVE OF THE ART HOUSE
CONVERGENCE IS TO INCREASE THE
QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF ART
HOUSES.
SO, YES, THIS MIGHT BE A NICE
INTRODUCTION TO CUSTOMERS WHO
ARE MORE INTERESTED IN GOING TO
SETH ROGEN STONER COMEDY THAN
THOSE WHO TEND TO GO TO THE ART
HOUSE FARE.
HOWEVER, WHO KNOWS.
THIS WOULD BE THE CITIZEN CANE
OF STONER COMEDIES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
COMPETITION WITH STREAMING
SITES?
I KNOW YOUTUBE AN AND OTHERS ARE
PLANNING TO MAKE THIS AVAILABLE.
IS THE COMTI AWAY
FROM AMC AND REGAL VERSUS ART
HIS TO ART HOUSE VERSUS
STREAMING?
>> WELL, IN THE ART HOUSE
MARKET, VIDEO ON DEMAND, DAY ON
DATE RELEASE STREAMING HAS
OCCURRED FOR A COUPLE OF YEARS.
WE'RE USED TO THAT.
WE LIKE THEATRICAL CLEARANCE.
IF YOU HAVE A MONOPOLY, YOU TEND
TO DO BETTER.
BUT DAY IN DATE RELEASE AND
DIVERSITY ABILITY THROUGH ONLINE
AND CABLE ACCESS IS NORMAL.
>> Sreenivasan: THANK YOU FOR
YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU, HAPPY HOLIDAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, A MOVE TO
MAKE IT EASIER FOR PEOPLE WHO
HAVE BEEN CONVICTED OF A CRIME
TO FIND EMPLOYMENT AFTER BEING
RELEASED FROM PRISON.
SEVERAL STATES AND
MUNICIPALITIES ARE PREVENTING
EMPLOYERS FROM ASKING ABOUT
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS UP FRONT.
THE SO-CALLED "BAN THE BOX"
MOVEMENT WOULD ELIMINATE A
CHECK-BOX ON INITIAL JOB
APPLICATIONS.
BRANDIS FRIEDMAN FROM OUR
AFFILIATE WTTW IN CHICAGO HAS
THIS REPORT.
HOW DO I KNOW I CAN TRUST
YOU?
>> Reporter: IT IS A QUESTION
ANY EMPLOYER MIGHT ASK THE
STUDENTS IN THIS ROOM.
EACH HAS A FELONY CONVICTION AND
HAS SERVED TIME IN PRISON AND
EACH OF THEM WANTS TO PROVE TO A
FUTURE EMPLOYER THAT HE OR SHE
CAN BE TRUSTED.
26-YEAR-OLD KARL LYNCH IS ONE OF
THE STUDENTS RECEIVING JOB
READINESS TRAINING FROM THE
SAFER FOUNDATION, A NONPROFIT
THAT HELPS RELEASED PRISONERS
TRANSITION BACK INTO SOCIETY.
>> THE ECONOMY IS ALWAYS
CHANGING, JOBS ARE ALWAYS
GETTING TOUGHER.
I FEEL LIKE IT WILL JUST PREPARE
ME TO GET READY TO REENTER INTO
THE WORKFORCE.
>> Reporter: LYNCH WAS
RELEASED FROM ILLINOIS STATE
PRISON IN EARLY JULY AFTER
SERVING TWO YEARS FOR BREAKING
INTO A CAR WITH SOMEONE INSIDE.
HE SAID A NEW JOB WILL HELP MAKE
HIM THE FATHER HE ONCE WAS TO
HIS TWO CHILDREN.
>> I KNOW I CAN'T GET THE TIME
BACK, BUT IT'S IMPORTANCE FOR ME
TO BE THERE AND LET THEM KNOW
DAD'S BACK.
>> Reporter: HE'S HOPING TO
GET A JOB IN HOSPITALITY OR
CUSTOMER SERVICE BUT IT'S BEEN
DIFFICULT AND HE THINKS IT'S
BECAUSE OF THE BOX ON
APPLICATIONS WHICH ASKS
CANDIDATES IF THEY'VE EVER BEEN
CONVICTED OF A CRIME.
>> IT GIVES YOU ANXIETY WHEN YOU
GET TO THE BOX, GOING, WOW, HOW
ARE THEY GOING TO FEEL ABOUT
THIS CRIME I COMMITTED.
>> THAT HAS KEPT A LOT OF PEOPLE
OUT OF THE INTERVIEW.
WITH THIS QUESTION REMOVED, THAT
WOULD REALLY HELP YOU.
>> Reporter: ILLINOIS IS THE
LATEST IN A SERIES OF STATES AND
MUNICIPALITIES TO PASS A LAW
PROHIBITING EMPLOYERS FROM
ASKING APPLICANTS IF THEY'D BEEN
CONVICTED OF A FELONY ON INITIAL
JOB APPLICATIONS.
PHIL IS A LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY IN CHICAGO.
>> ESSENTIALLY, IT DELAYS WHEN A
PROSPECTIVE EMPLOYER CAN INQUIRE
ABOUT A CANDIDATE'S CRIMINAL
HISTORY UNTIL THE EMPLOYER HAS
NOTIFIED THE EMPLOYEE THAT THE
EMPLOYEE WILL BE GRANTED AN
INITIAL INTERVIEW.
>> Reporter: WHILE EACH LAW IS
SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT, THE GOAL FOR
EACH IS TO GET JOB APPLICANTS
WITH CONVICTIONS PAST THE
INITIAL SCREENING.
>> HAWAII SAYS YOU HAVE TO HAVE
A CONDITIONAL OFFER OF
EMPLOYMENT.
MOST LAWS HAVE EXCEPTIONS THAT
VARY FROM STATE TO STATE AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: THE ILLINOIS LAW
WHICH TAKES EFFECTS JANUARY 1,
2015, APPLIES ONLY TO PRIVATE
EMPLOYERS WITH 15 OR MORE
EMPLOYEES.
IT PROVIDES EXEMPTIONS IN
SITUATIONS WHERE STATE OR
FEDERAL LAW PROHIBITS HIRING
APPLICANTS WITH CERTAIN
CONVICTIONS WHERE THE NEW HIRE
WOULD REQUIRE A FIDELITY BOND
THAT ENINSURANCE EMPLOYEES WHO
WORK WITH MONEY OR WHERE THE NEW
APPLICANT WOULD NEED TO BE
LICENSED UNDER THE MEDICAL
EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE ACT.
A BILL LIKE THIS HAS BEEN IN THE
LONG TIME IN THE MAKING.
>> EMPLOYMENT IS THE BIGGEST
LINK TO REDUCE RECIDIVISM.
THE FIRST THING THEY WANT TO DO
IS GET A JOB TO SHOW THEIR
WORTHINESS AND VIABILITY FIRST
OF ALL TO THEMSELVES AND
FAMILIES.
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION
ROUTINELY DENIES THAT
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Reporter: SAFER FOUNDATIONS
DIRECTOR POLICY ADVOCACY ANTHONY
LAWREY SAYS GOVERNMENTS ARE
LOOKING AT THE WAYS TO CUT
EXPENSE OF INCARCERATION AND
COMMUNITIES ARE LOOKING TO TURN
FORMER INMATES INTO PRODUCTIVE
CITIZENS.
>> IT IS THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE
OF THEIR LIVES.
THE CRIMINAL WORKER IS THE NEW
CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUE.
PEOPLE DENIED EMPLOYMENT NO
MATTER HOW MILD OR OLD THE
RECORD IS.
>> Reporter: THE ILLINOIS
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
RELEASES ABOUT 30,000 INMATES A
YEAR AND HALF RETURN TO CHICAGO.
OF THOSE 15,000, EXPERTS SAY 80%
COME TO ONE OF SEVEN
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE THIS ONE,
OFTEN UNFORTUNATELY KNOWN FOR
ITS CULTURE OF POVERTY AND
VIOLENCE.
WHEN ENTIRE COMMUNITIES ARE
FILLED WITH PEOPLE WHO CAN'T GET
JOBS, THE CYCLE OF POVERTY KEEPS
SPINNING.
>> I SEE PEOPLE RECOMMIT AND
COMMIT CRIMES THEY'VE DONE IN
THE PAST AND THINK SOMETHING
DIFFERENT IS GOING TO HAPPEN,
BUT IT'S NOT.
THAT'S WHY I DON'T WANT TO GO
DOWN THAT ROUTE AGAIN.
I WANT TO TRY TO FIND WORK.
>> Reporter: UNDER EXISTING
FEDERAL AND STATE A WHRAWS,
EMPLOYERS AREN'T ALLOWED TO USE
A CONVICTION AS A PRE-SCREENING
TOOL.
ADVOCATES SAY IT'S NOT WORKING.
TODD IS THE LEAD AT THE JUSTICE
UNIT.
>> SCREENING IS DONE IN NEARLY
EVERY STATE AND THAT'S WHY THE
MOVEMENT PRECIPITATED BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE FRUSTRATED.
WE'RE ASKING PEOPLE WHO COMMIT
CRIMES AND ENDURE THE TIME TO
GET EDUCATION TO GET EXTRA
TRAINING AND GET THEIR LIVES
BACK ON TRACK.
WHEN THEY DO, THERE'S NO JOB
OPPORTUNITIES BECAUSE THEY'RE
BEING DENIED OUTRIGHT.
>> Reporter: ATTORNEY JEFFREY
WISH WHO CHAIRS THE ILLINOIS
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE EMPLOYMENT
COUNCIL ARGUES THE "BAN THE BOX"
AREN'T NECESSARY.
>> BEFORE "BAN THE BOX," THERE
WAS TITLE 7, BEFORE "BAN THE
BOX," THERE WAS THE ILLINOIS
HUMAN RIGHTS ACT.
THERE ARE A VARIETY OF FEDERAL
LAWS THAT PROTECT CANDIDATES
FROM HAVING EMPLOYERS USE
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS OR ARREST
RECORDS AS FILTERS.
THOSE EXIST.
THEY STILL EXIST.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS EMPLOYERS
ALREADY FOLLOWING EXISTING LAWS
WON'T HAVE A PROBLEM OBEYING YET
ANOTHER ONE, AND EMPLOYERS WILL
STILL BE ALLOWED TO LEARN AN
APPLICANT'S CRIMINAL HISTORY,
JUST NOT UP FRONT.
>> HOW RECENT, WHAT'S THE NATURE
OF THE UNDERLYING OFFENSE, WHAT
FACTS CAN WE GATHER, AND WHAT
EXACTLY, PRECISELY IS THIS
PERSON GOING TO DO FOR THE
EMPLOYER?
ALL THAT HAS TO BE TAKEN INTO
CONSIDERATION.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S
EXACTLY WHAT ADVOCATES FOR
PEOPLE LIKE KARL LYNCH ARE
HOPING.
>> IT MOTIVATES ME TO SEE A
PERSON GO OUT THERE AND GET A
JOB.
>> I'M GOING TO FEEL LIKE I'VE
GOT A GOOD CHANCE EVERY DAY.
IF I'M GOING TO SIT BACK AND BE
SAD AND BLUE, THAT'S NOT GOING
TO GET ME ANYWHERE.
>> Reporter: IN ILLINOIS, IT
COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE FOR
3 MILLION PEOPLE WHO HAVE A
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW,CHANGE AT
THE VATICAN.
POPE FRANCIS IS USHERING IN A
NEW ERA IN ROME.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT.
>> Brown: THIS IS THE SECOND
TIME POPE FRANCIS HAS DELIVERED
A CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE
WORLD'S CATHOLICS.
ALMOST TWO YEARS AGO IN MARCH OF
2013, AVERAGEN TINE CARDINAL
JORGE MARIO BERGOGLIO BECAME THE
FIRST NON-EUROPEAN POPE SINCE
THE YEAR 741.
HE WAS A SURPRISE CHOICE AND HAS
CAPTURED THE WORLD'S ATTENTION
EVER SINCE.
FRANCIS CHOSE A SIMPLER
LIFESTYLE RESIDING IN THE GUEST
HOUSE RATHER THAN APOSTOLIC
PALACE, HAVING A PLAIN BLACK
SEDAN INSTEAD OF SHOULD EVER
MERCEDES.
HE HAS TAKEN MORE ACTIVE ROLE IN
DIPLOMACY, VISITED TURKEY WHERE
THOUSANDS FLED THE FORCES OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
WHILE THERE HE REAFFIRMED THE
USE OF MILITARY FORCE AGAINST
I.S.
NOW WE'VE LEARNED OF HIS KEY
PART IN SHEPHERDING NEGOTIATIONS
LED TO AN OPENING BETWEEN THE
U.S. AND CUBA.
IN SEPTEMBER OF NEXT YEAR,
FRANCIS WILL TRAVEL TO
PHILADELPHIA FOR AN
INTERNATIONAL MEETING ON THE
FAMILY AND IS EXPECTED TO STOP
IN NEW YORK CITY.
A NEW BIOGRAPHY BEGINS TO FILL
IN MORE OF THE STORY OF THE MAN,
THE GREAT REFORMER, FRANCIS IN
THE MAKING OF A RADICAL POPE.
IT'S AUTHOR WAS AUSTIN IVORY,
BRITISH JOURNALIST, FORMER
ADVISOR TO A TOP ENGLISH
CARDINAL AND CO-FOUNDER OF
CATHOLIC VOICES, A LAY GROUP
THAT WORKS TO IMPROVE THE
CHURCH'S REPUTATION IN THE
MEDIA.
AND WELCOME TO>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: WHEN YOU GO BACK TO
POPE FRANCIS' CHILDHOOD, HIS
ROOTS IN ARGENTINA, WHAT
PICTURES DO YOU SEE?
>> I SEE A MAN OF
LOWER-MIDDLE-CLASS ITALIAN
IMMIGRANTS WHO UNDERSTANDS THE
PAIN AND SUFFERING OF THE POOR
AND PEOPLE WHO MOVE THE NEW
COUNTRY TO THE WORLD.
A MAN WHO'S PROFOUNDLY RELIGIOUS
FROM AN EARLY AGE BUT NOT IN A
PARTICULARLY PIOUS WAY.
>> Brown: NOT EXPECTED HE
WOULD GO TO THE PRIESTHOOD?
>> HIS POLICIES AND INTELLIGENCE
WERE NOTICED SINCE CHILDHOOD.
I THINK YOU SEE THE FUTURE
PASTORAL POPE WE HAVE NOW.
>> Brown: THE UNDERSTANDING OF
THE POVERTY AND THE POOR COMES
FROM --
>> FROM HIS FAMILY.
HE GREW UP, ACTUALLY REASONABLY
COMFORTABLY BUT THEY DIDN'T
THROW THEIR MONEY AROUND.
THEY DIDN'T TAKE VACATIONS, THEY
RECYCLED CLOTHES.
I THINK IT'S MORE FROM HIM.
I UNDERSTAND FROM HIS CHILDHOOD
FRIENDS, HE WAS ALWAYS DOING
THINGS FOR OTHERS AND HELPING
PEOPLE AND CONCERNED.
WHEN HE SPOKE ABOUT HIS FUTURE,
HE SAID, I DON'T WANT TO BE
STUCK IN THE CATHEDRAL.
I WANT TO BE ON W THE PEOPLE ON
THE FRONTIERY THE POOR ARE>> BrN
ARGENTINA IN THE JESUIT ORDER
WERE HORRIBLE.
DID HE DO ENOUGH TO STOP THE
KILLINGS AND DISAPPEARANCES
GOING ON IN THE SO-CALLED DIRTY
WAR?
>> IT WAS AN EXTREMELY TOUGH
TIME WHERE THERE WAS A
POLARIZATION IN ARGENTINA AS
WELL AS THE JESUITS.
WE HAVE ONE TO HAVE THE WRN
HEMISPHERE'S LARGEST GUERILLA
FORCES WHICH GENERALLY
THREATENED THE STATE AND A
FEROCIOUS DICTATORSHIP WHICH
THEN KILLED THOUSANDS OF THEM TO
EXTERMINATE THEM AND HE TAKES
OVER THE JESUIT ORDER IN A TIME
OF INTERNAL CRISIS AND REFOCUSES
ON THE MISSION AND THE POOR AND
HE TRIES TO DETACH THEM FROM
IDEOLOGIES, AND THAT WAS HIS
ROLE DURING THAT TIME.
>TIME.
HE STOOD A DELICATE LINE.
HE PROTECTED THE JESUITS FROM
THE DICTATORSHIP, THE REGIME.
ON THE OTHER HAND, PROTECTING
THOSE THE DICTATORSHIP WAS
AFTER.
>> Brown: YOU KNOW HOW HE
LOOKS BACK AT THOSE YEARS AT
THAT TIME?
DOES HE FEEL THAT HE DID ENOUGH
THEN?
>> NO.
HE'S SAID SO PUBLICLY.
HE'S TORTURED BY THE FACT THAT
THERE WERE PEOPLE WHO CAME TO
HIM FOR HELP WHOM HE COULDN'T
HELP.
BUT HE SHELTERED DOZENS OF POEMF
THE COUNTRY.
PEOPLE LIVED THROUGH THAT TIME
REALIZED LATER WHAT HAPPENED.
>> Brown: THE BOOK IS CALLED
"THE GREAT REFORMER."
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
A REFORMER IN WHAT SENSE?
>> IT'S QUITE A PROVOCATIVE
TITLE FOR PEOPLE IN THE CHURCH.
REFORM IN THE CHURCH HISTORY HAS
MADE A SCHISM.
BUT ANOTHER KIND OF REFORM GOES
WACK TO TESTIMONY SOV THE GREAT
MEDIEVAL POPES WHO WANTED TO
RETURN THE CHURCH TO THE FORMER
MISSION.
TO REDUCE DEPENDENCY ON WEALTH
AND POWER, DEPENDING ON JESUS
CHRIST AND THE HOLY SPIRIT,
FOCUSING ON THE POOR.
I SEE HIM IN THAT TRADITION AND
THAT'S WHY I SAY HE'S A GREAT
REFORMER.
AND I SHOW IN THE BOOK, IN EVERY
POSITION HE'S BEEN IN THE
CHURCH, HE'S ACTUALLY DONE THAT.
HE'S REFORMED.
>> Brown: IT DOES NOT MEAN,
THOUGH, OVERHAULING CHURCH
TEACHINGS, DOES IT?
THERE WAS MUCH ATTENTION WHEN HE
SPOKE OUT ABOUT, FOR EXAMPLE,
SAYING THE CHURCH SEEMS T TO PUT
TOO MUCH ATTENTION ON
HOMOSEXUALITY OR ABORTION.
>> IT WAS UNDERSTOOD BY SOME AS
WEAKENS OR DILUTING CHURCH
DOCTRINE.
SHE'S SAYING THERE IS ANOTHER
PART OF CHURCH TEACHING WHICH IS
GOD WANTS THE HEAL YOU, SAVE
YOU, THE CHURCH IS A MOTHER AS
WELL AS A DEEPER.
THAT'S WHAT HE THINKS HAS GOTTEN
LOST IN PERHAPS THE EFFORT OF
THE CHURCH IN THE LAST FEW YEARS
TO HAVE A KIND OF CLARITY OF
DOCTRINE.
HE'S NOT CHANGING CHURCH
TEACHING, HE'S SHOWING IT IN ITS
FULLNESS.
>> Brown: SOME OF WHAT HE HAS
DONE AS STIRRED CONTROVERSY
WITHIN THE CHURCH.
>> THE OPPOSITION TO FRANCIS IS
REALLY, AND IT CAME TO THE FORE
IN OCTOBER WHEN HE CAME TOGETHER
WITH THE WORLD'S BISHOPS TO
CONSIDER DIFFICULT QUESTIONS.
SOME OF THEM DISLIKED EVEN THAT
AND THE WAY THE MEDIA WAS
INTERPRETING IT.
I RECKON IT'S 20 OR 30 OUT OF 90
OR 100.
WE'RE NOT TALKING A MAJORITY,
BUT NONETHELESS A GROUP OF
PEOPLE WHO I THINK ARE
UNCOMFORTABLE WHO WANT A CERTAIN
KIND OF CLARITY THEY THINK
FRANCIS IS THREATENING.
I THINK HE EXPOSES PEOPLE'S
IDEOLOGY RATHER THAN THE GOSPEL.
>> Brown: WHERE KYUNG HIS
BIGGEST IMPACT WILL BE?
>> TWO ACHIEVEMENTS, THE FIRST
THE REFORM FOR WHICH HE WAS
ELECTED, CLEAN UP OF THE
VATICAN, FINANCES, THAT KIND OF
THING.
I THINK IT IS A VERY IMPORTANT
AND IN THE BOOK I KIND OF BREAK
THING.
THE STORY OF THE REMARKABLE
AND IN THE BOOK I KIND OF BREAK
BREAKTHROUGH HAPPENING BETWEEN
THE STORY OF THE REMARKABLE
CATHOLICS AND EVANGELICALS,
BREAKTHROUGH HAPPENING BETWEEN
PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT HERE IN
CATHOLICS AND EVANGELICALS,
THE U.S., MOST PROTESTANT
PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT HERE IN
CHRISTIANS ARE NOW EVANGELICALS.
THE U.S., MOST PROTESTANT
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH HASN'T HAD
CHRISTIANS ARE NOW EVANGELICALS.
MUCH RELATIONSHIP WITH THEM.
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH HASN'T HAD
HE IS VERY MUCH A CHARISMATIC
MUCH RELATIONSHIP WITH THEM.
CATHOLIC WHO KNOWS EVANGELICALS
HE IS VERY MUCH A CHARISMATIC
AS WELL AS I THINK THERE WILL BE
CATHOLIC WHO KNOWS EVANGELICALS
AN IMPORTANT DECLARATION IN THE
AS WELL AS I THINK THERE WILL BE
COMING YEARS BETWEEN CATHOLICS
AN IMPORTANT DECLARATION IN THE
AND EVANGELICALS WHICH WILL
COMING YEARS BETWEEN CATHOLICS
MEANT THE RIVALRY BETWEEN THEM.
AND EVANGELICALS WHICH WILL
>> Brown: "THE GREAT REFORMER"
MEANT THE RIVALRY BETWEEN THEM.
AUSTIN IVORY.
>> Brown: "THE GREAT REFORMER"
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
AUSTIN IVORY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: WE TURN AGAIN
>> THANK YOU.
NOW TO A COUNTRY WHICH HAS
>> Sreenivasan: WE TURN AGAIN
DOMINATED HEADLINES FOR MUCH OF
NOW TO A COUNTRY WHICH HAS
THE LAST YEAR-- UKRAINE.
DOMINATED HEADLINES FOR MUCH OF
WHILE MUCH HAS BEEN REPORTED
THE LAST YEAR-- UKRAINE.
ABOUT THE OVERTHROW OF ITS
WHILE MUCH HAS BEEN REPORTED
FORMER LEADER, NEW GOVERNMENT,
ABOUT THE OVERTHROW OF ITS
THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA, AND
FORMER LEADER, NEW GOVERNMENT,
RUSSIAN INCURSIONS INTO THE
THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA, AND
COUNTRY, TONIGHT, SPECIAL
RUSSIAN INCURSIONS INTO THE
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY BRINGS US
COUNTRY, TONIGHT, SPECIAL
A STORY ON THE LESS KNOWN BATTLE
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY BRINGS US
THAT'S HAPPENING IN THE FORMER
A STORY ON THE LESS KNOWN BATTLE
SOVIET REPUBLIC, OVER RELIGION.
THAT'S HAPPENING IN THE FORMER
THE STORY WAS PRODUCED IN
SOVIET REPUBLIC, OVER RELIGION.
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE BUREAU FOR
THE STORY WAS PRODUCED IN
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING.
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE BUREAU FOR
>> Reporter: IN THE WESTERN
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING.
UKRAINIAN VILLAGE OF BUTYN SITS
>> Reporter: IN THE WESTERN
A PICTURESQUE BLUE CHURCH.
UKRAINIAN VILLAGE OF BUTYN SITS
IT HAS SURVIVED TWO WORLD WARS
A PICTURESQUE BLUE CHURCH.
AND THE COMMUNIST AND ATHEIST
IT HAS SURVIVED TWO WORLD WARS
SOVIET UNION.
AND THE COMMUNIST AND ATHEIST
NOW IN 2014, WITH ITS NATION
SOVIET UNION.
GRIPPED IN WAR, ST. NICHOLAS HAS
NOW IN 2014, WITH ITS NATION
BECOME ANOTHER BATTLEFRONT IN
GRIPPED IN WAR, ST. NICHOLAS HAS
THE CONFLICT: ONE OF BELIEFS AND
BECOME ANOTHER BATTLEFRONT IN
EVEN POLITICAL INFLUENCE.
THE CONFLICT: ONE OF BELIEFS AND
IT USED TO BELONG TO THE
EVEN POLITICAL INFLUENCE.
UKRAINIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH OF THE
IT USED TO BELONG TO THE
MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE, THE
UKRAINIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH OF THE
COUNTRY'S LARGEST DENOMINATION,
MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE, THE
WITH A DIRECT LINK TO RUSSIA'S
COUNTRY'S LARGEST DENOMINATION,
OWN POLITICALLY INFLUENTIAL
WITH A DIRECT LINK TO RUSSIA'S
ORTHODOX CHURCH.
OWN POLITICALLY INFLUENTIAL
BUT VILLAGERS IN BUTYN SAY IT
ORTHODOX CHURCH.
ALL BEGAN TO UNRAVEL WHEN THEIR
BUT VILLAGERS IN BUTYN SAY IT
PRIEST REFUSED TO PRAY FOR THE
ALL BEGAN TO UNRAVEL WHEN THEIR
PROTESTERS WHO WERE CALLING FOR
PRIEST REFUSED TO PRAY FOR THE
THE OVERTHROW OF A PRO-RUSSIAN
PROTESTERS WHO WERE CALLING FOR
PRESIDENT IN KIEV'S CITY CENTER
THE OVERTHROW OF A PRO-RUSSIAN
A YEAR AGO.
PRESIDENT IN KIEV'S CITY CENTER
>> ( translated ): THAT WAS MY
A YEAR AGO.
CHILD THERE.
>> ( translated ): THAT WAS MY
THEY WERE STUDENTS AND CHILDREN
CHILD THERE.
OF OTHER PARENTS THAT WERE
THEY WERE STUDENTS AND CHILDREN
RESIDENTS OF OUR VILLAGE.
OF OTHER PARENTS THAT WERE
THAT WAS THE LAST STRAW!
RESIDENTS OF OUR VILLAGE.
>> Reporter: SVETLANA EVGENIEVNA
THAT WAS THE LAST STRAW!
AND HER NEIGHBORS FELT THEY HAD
>> Reporter: SVETLANA EVGENIEVNA
TO REMOVE THEIR PRIEST.
AND HER NEIGHBORS FELT THEY HAD
>> ( translated ): THERE WAS A
TO REMOVE THEIR PRIEST.
GATHERING OF THE VILLAGE, THERE
>> ( translated ): THERE WAS A
WERE SHOUTS AND QUARRELS, AND WE
GATHERING OF THE VILLAGE, THERE
WEREN'T SURE WHAT TO DO.
WERE SHOUTS AND QUARRELS, AND WE
ONE MAN PROPOSED A REFERENDUM:
WEREN'T SURE WHAT TO DO.
HOW MANY FOR AND HOW MANY
ONE MAN PROPOSED A REFERENDUM:
AGAINST.
HOW MANY FOR AND HOW MANY
>> Reporter: VILLAGERS VOTED TO
AGAINST.
SWITCH ALLEGIANCE TO THE
>> Reporter: VILLAGERS VOTED TO
SMALLER, UNOFFICIAL BUT OVERTLY
SWITCH ALLEGIANCE TO THE
PRO-UKRAINIAN CHURCH, CALLED THE
SMALLER, UNOFFICIAL BUT OVERTLY
KYIV PATRIARCHATE.
PRO-UKRAINIAN CHURCH, CALLED THE
IN OCTOBER, A NEW PRIEST ARRIVED
KYIV PATRIARCHATE.
AND PRO-KYIV PARISHIONERS,
IN OCTOBER, A NEW PRIEST ARRIVED
BACKED BY ULTRA-NATIONALIST
AND PRO-KYIV PARISHIONERS,
ACTIVISTS, TOOK OVER THE
BACKED BY ULTRA-NATIONALIST
GROUNDS.
ACTIVISTS, TOOK OVER THE
AND THE VILLAGE OF BUTYN ISN'T
GROUNDS.
ALONE.
AND THE VILLAGE OF BUTYN ISN'T
MORE THAN 30 OTHER UKRAINIAN
ALONE.
COMMUNITIES HAVE REMOVED PRIESTS
MORE THAN 30 OTHER UKRAINIAN
BELONGING TO THE MOSCOW
COMMUNITIES HAVE REMOVED PRIESTS
PATRIARCHATE.
BELONGING TO THE MOSCOW
THE PROCESS HAS SOMETIMES BEEN
PATRIARCHATE.
CHAOTIC, EVEN VIOLENT.
THE PROCESS HAS SOMETIMES BEEN
IN BUTYN, MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE
CHAOTIC, EVEN VIOLENT.
LOYALISTS, LIKE TAMARA
IN BUTYN, MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE
KAZNOVETSKA AND OLGA TSIMBALUK,
LOYALISTS, LIKE TAMARA
WERE LOCKED OUT.
KAZNOVETSKA AND OLGA TSIMBALUK,
>> ( translated ): SOMEONE TOLD
WERE LOCKED OUT.
ME "YOU ARE A BANDIT, YOU ARE A
>> ( translated ): SOMEONE TOLD
SEPARATIST, YOU PRAY IN THE
ME "YOU ARE A BANDIT, YOU ARE A
LANGUAGE OF THE AGGRESSOR."
SEPARATIST, YOU PRAY IN THE
I WAS JUST GOING TO CHURCH; I
LANGUAGE OF THE AGGRESSOR."
PRAY TO GOD, I DON'T PRAY TO
I WAS JUST GOING TO CHURCH; I
PUTIN!
PRAY TO GOD, I DON'T PRAY TO
WE ARE NOT AGAINST UKRAINE.
PUTIN!
WE ARE SIMPLY CHRISTIANS WHO
WE ARE NOT AGAINST UKRAINE.
CANNOT LEAVE OUR 1,000-YEAR-OLD
WE ARE SIMPLY CHRISTIANS WHO
FAITH.
CANNOT LEAVE OUR 1,000-YEAR-OLD
>> Reporter: THE KYIV
FAITH.
PATRIARCHATE WAS STARTED IN 1992
>> Reporter: THE KYIV
BY A BREAKAWAY PRIEST NAMED
PATRIARCHATE WAS STARTED IN 1992
FILARET, WHO FELT UKRAINIANS
BY A BREAKAWAY PRIEST NAMED
DESERVED A CHURCH SEPARATE FROM
FILARET, WHO FELT UKRAINIANS
RUSSIA.
DESERVED A CHURCH SEPARATE FROM
LAST YEAR IT GRABBED THE
RUSSIA.
POLITICAL MOMENT AND NOT ONLY
LAST YEAR IT GRABBED THE
JOINED PROTESTORS, BUT PROTECTED
POLITICAL MOMENT AND NOT ONLY
THEM.
JOINED PROTESTORS, BUT PROTECTED
18-YEAR-OLD PROTESTER IRINA
THEM.
KOCUBINSKAYA WAS HURT IN AN
18-YEAR-OLD PROTESTER IRINA
ATTACK BY RIOT POLE ANICD FOUND
KOCUBINSKAYA WAS HURT IN AN
REFUGE WITH OTHERS AT A
ATTACK BY RIOT POLE ANICD FOUND
MONASTERY RUN BY THE CHURCH.
REFUGE WITH OTHERS AT A
>> ( translated ): THE CHURCH
MONASTERY RUN BY THE CHURCH.
PLAYED NOT JUST AN ACTUAL BUT
>> ( translated ): THE CHURCH
ALSO A SYMBOLIC ROLE.
PLAYED NOT JUST AN ACTUAL BUT
PEOPLE REMARKED THAT WE WERE
ALSO A SYMBOLIC ROLE.
HIDING HERE JUST LIKE THEY DID
PEOPLE REMARKED THAT WE WERE
FROM BARBARIANS 1,000  YEARS
HIDING HERE JUST LIKE THEY DID
AGO.
FROM BARBARIANS 1,000  YEARS
THAT THE PRIESTS HERE OPENED THE
AGO.
DOORS I THINK IS IMPORTANT,
THAT THE PRIESTS HERE OPENED THE
BECAUSE THE MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE
DOORS I THINK IS IMPORTANT,
WOULD HARDLY DO THE SAME.
BECAUSE THE MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE
>> Reporter: THE SIMMERING
WOULD HARDLY DO THE SAME.
PERCEPTION THAT THE MOSCOW
>> Reporter: THE SIMMERING
PATRIARCHATE IS ON THE WRONG
PERCEPTION THAT THE MOSCOW
SIDE OF HISTORY IN UKRAINE WAS
PATRIARCHATE IS ON THE WRONG
TOO MUCH FOR SOME PRIESTS, LIKE
SIDE OF HISTORY IN UKRAINE WAS
FATHER VITALY EISMONTH.
TOO MUCH FOR SOME PRIESTS, LIKE
>> ( translated ): I WAS
FATHER VITALY EISMONTH.
ANXIOUS.
>> ( translated ): I WAS
I THOUGHT THE CHURCH WOULD
ANXIOUS.
SPEAK, BUT THE CHURCH WAS
I THOUGHT THE CHURCH WOULD
SILENT.
SPEAK, BUT THE CHURCH WAS
AND WHEN RUSSIAN FORCES INTRUDED
SILENT.
IN THE EAST, THE CHURCH I WAS
AND WHEN RUSSIAN FORCES INTRUDED
SERVING FOR 23 YEARS, AND WAS
IN THE EAST, THE CHURCH I WAS
DEFENDING ALL THIS TIME, TURNED
SERVING FOR 23 YEARS, AND WAS
ITS BACK ON ITS PEOPLE.
DEFENDING ALL THIS TIME, TURNED
I COULDN'T DEFEND IT ANY MORE.
ITS BACK ON ITS PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: EISMONTH DEFECTED
I COULDN'T DEFEND IT ANY MORE.
TO THE KYIV PATRIARCHATE AND
>> Reporter: EISMONTH DEFECTED
JOINED A CHURCH 100 MILES FROM
TO THE KYIV PATRIARCHATE AND
HOME, SUBORDINATE TO MUCH
JOINED A CHURCH 100 MILES FROM
YOUNGER PRIESTS.
HOME, SUBORDINATE TO MUCH
HE SAYS THE SCRIFAICE IT WORTH
YOUNGER PRIESTS.
IT.
HE SAYS THE SCRIFAICE IT WORTH
>> ( translated ): PEOPLE ARE
IT.
AWAKENING, AND I THINK IT'S ONLY
>> ( translated ): PEOPLE ARE
THE BEGINNING.
AWAKENING, AND I THINK IT'S ONLY
AND OF COURSE IT'S ALARMING FOR
THE BEGINNING.
THE PRIESTS BECAUSE THEIR
AND OF COURSE IT'S ALARMING FOR
INFLUENCE IS NOT THE ONE THEY
THE PRIESTS BECAUSE THEIR
THOUGHT THEY HAD.
INFLUENCE IS NOT THE ONE THEY
>> Reporter: KYIV PATRIARCH
THOUGHT THEY HAD.
FILARET OPENLY SUPPORTS
>> Reporter: KYIV PATRIARCH
UKRAINE'S POLITICAL CHANGES, AND
FILARET OPENLY SUPPORTS
DOESN'T PULL ANY PUNCHES WHEN
UKRAINE'S POLITICAL CHANGES, AND
TALNG AKIBOUT HIS RIVAL CHURCH.
DOESN'T PULL ANY PUNCHES WHEN
>> ( translated ): IN THE MOSCOW
TALNG AKIBOUT HIS RIVAL CHURCH.
PATRIARCHATE, THERE ARE PRIESTS
>> ( translated ): IN THE MOSCOW
AND BISHOPS THAT ARE OPENLY
PATRIARCHATE, THERE ARE PRIESTS
SUPPORTING PUTIN AND ARE CALLING
AND BISHOPS THAT ARE OPENLY
OUR GOVERNMENT A JUNTA.
SUPPORTING PUTIN AND ARE CALLING
AND WHEN PEOPLE HEAR THAT, THEY
OUR GOVERNMENT A JUNTA.
WANT TO LEAVE.
AND WHEN PEOPLE HEAR THAT, THEY
>> Reporter: BISHOP KLIMENT IS
WANT TO LEAVE.
THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE MOSCOW
>> Reporter: BISHOP KLIMENT IS
PATRIARCHATE.
THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE MOSCOW
>> ( translated ): THIS SLANDER
PATRIARCHATE.
AND INFORMATIONAL FILTH HAS
>> ( translated ): THIS SLANDER
BECOME A REAL PROPAGANDA WAR
AND INFORMATIONAL FILTH HAS
AGAINST OUR CHURCH, THAT HAS
BECOME A REAL PROPAGANDA WAR
ESCALATED TO THE POINT WHERE IT
AGAINST OUR CHURCH, THAT HAS
DESTABILIZES UKRAINE.
ESCALATED TO THE POINT WHERE IT
>> Reporter: KLIMENT SAYS THAT
DESTABILIZES UKRAINE.
ALTHOUGH HIS CHURCH IS
>> Reporter: KLIMENT SAYS THAT
AFFILIATED WITH RUSSIA, IT MAKES
ALTHOUGH HIS CHURCH IS
ITS OWN DECISIONS.
AFFILIATED WITH RUSSIA, IT MAKES
>> ( translated ): WE HAVE BOTH
ITS OWN DECISIONS.
A POLITICAL AND MILITARY
>> ( translated ): WE HAVE BOTH
CONFLICT IN UKRAINE AND SOME
A POLITICAL AND MILITARY
RELIGIOUS GROUPS ARE USING THIS
CONFLICT IN UKRAINE AND SOME
TO PLAY SOME KIND OF CARD.
RELIGIOUS GROUPS ARE USING THIS
FACTUALLY WHAT IS HAPPENING IS A
TO PLAY SOME KIND OF CARD.
RAIDER SEIZURE.
FACTUALLY WHAT IS HAPPENING IS A
THEY ARE UNCONSTITUTIONALLY
RAIDER SEIZURE.
TAKING AWAY THE RIGHTS OF
THEY ARE UNCONSTITUTIONALLY
PEOPLE.
TAKING AWAY THE RIGHTS OF
THEY ARE THE OPENING A SECOND
PEOPLE.
FRONT INSIDE OF UKRAINE.
THEY ARE THE OPENING A SECOND
>> ( translated ): THE MOSCOW
FRONT INSIDE OF UKRAINE.
PATRIARCHATE REACTS AS IF WE ARE
>> ( translated ): THE MOSCOW
INVADING ITS CHURCHES.
PATRIARCHATE REACTS AS IF WE ARE
WE ARE NOT INVADING, WE ARE
INVADING ITS CHURCHES.
ACCEPTING PARISHES THAT WANT TO
WE ARE NOT INVADING, WE ARE
SWITCH.
ACCEPTING PARISHES THAT WANT TO
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE MORE
SWITCH.
CONTENTIOUS TURNOVERS, WHICH
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE MORE
BISHOP KLIMENT COMPLAINED ABOUT
CONTENTIOUS TURNOVERS, WHICH
TO THE UKRAINIAN PARLIAMENT, WAS
BISHOP KLIMENT COMPLAINED ABOUT
IN THE VILLAGE OF KHODOSY.
TO THE UKRAINIAN PARLIAMENT, WAS
>> ( translated ): PUTIN STOP!
IN THE VILLAGE OF KHODOSY.
NO GO TO UKRAINE!
>> ( translated ): PUTIN STOP!
>> Reporter: THERE WAS A VOTE
NO GO TO UKRAINE!
HERE TOO, BUT THE MOSCOW
>> Reporter: THERE WAS A VOTE
PATRIARCHATE PRIEST AND HIS
HERE TOO, BUT THE MOSCOW
FOLLOWERS BARRICADED THEMSELVES
PATRIARCHATE PRIEST AND HIS
INSIDE, USING A FIRE
FOLLOWERS BARRICADED THEMSELVES
EXTINGUISHER TO WARD OFF THE
INSIDE, USING A FIRE
CROWDS THAT HAD GATHERED.
EXTINGUISHER TO WARD OFF THE
SEVERAL PEOPLE WERE INJURED, AND
CROWDS THAT HAD GATHERED.
LOCAL OFFICIALS, LIKE RUSLAN
SEVERAL PEOPLE WERE INJURED, AND
SIVIY, SAY THEY ARE NOT EQUIPPED
LOCAL OFFICIALS, LIKE RUSLAN
TO HANDLE SUCH CHAOS.
SIVIY, SAY THEY ARE NOT EQUIPPED
>> ( translated ): BY LAW, THE
TO HANDLE SUCH CHAOS.
GOVERNMENT SHOULDN'T INTERVENE
>> ( translated ): BY LAW, THE
INTO RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS.
GOVERNMENT SHOULDN'T INTERVENE
BUT UNFORTUNATELY WE CAN'T STAY
INTO RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS.
OUT OF THIS, SINCE THE TENSIONS
BUT UNFORTUNATELY WE CAN'T STAY
ARE PHYSICAL.
OUT OF THIS, SINCE THE TENSIONS
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS LOCALLY AND
ARE PHYSICAL.
IN KIEV SHOULD CREATE MECHANISMS
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS LOCALLY AND
TO SATISFY THE PEOPLE, SO THAT
IN KIEV SHOULD CREATE MECHANISMS
IT WILL BE EASIER FOR US TO
TO SATISFY THE PEOPLE, SO THAT
MANAGE.
IT WILL BE EASIER FOR US TO
>> Reporter: UKRAINE'S CHURCH
MANAGE.
CRISIS IS NOW DRAWING STRONG
>> Reporter: UKRAINE'S CHURCH
LANGUAGE FROM MOSCOW, THE
CRISIS IS NOW DRAWING STRONG
KREMLIN LABELING IT A HUMAN
LANGUAGE FROM MOSCOW, THE
RIGHTS VIOLATION AND PRESIDENT
KREMLIN LABELING IT A HUMAN
PUTIN HIMSELF DERIDING ACTIVISTS
RIGHTS VIOLATION AND PRESIDENT
FOR THEIR SILENCE ON THE
PUTIN HIMSELF DERIDING ACTIVISTS
SEIZURES, THAT HE CALLS A
FOR THEIR SILENCE ON THE
TRAGEDY.
SEIZURES, THAT HE CALLS A
BACK IN BUTYN, RISHPAIONERS
TRAGEDY.
DON'T SEE IT THAT WAY AND ARE
BACK IN BUTYN, RISHPAIONERS
EMBRACING THEIR NEW CHURCH.
DON'T SEE IT THAT WAY AND ARE
>> ( translated ): TODAY WE ARE
EMBRACING THEIR NEW CHURCH.
HEARING A PRAYER FOR OUR DEAR
>> ( translated ): TODAY WE ARE
UKRAINE.
HEARING A PRAYER FOR OUR DEAR
WE ARE A HEARING PRAYER FOR OUR
UKRAINE.
KIDS THAT DIED.
WE ARE A HEARING PRAYER FOR OUR
WE ARE HEARING A PRAYER FOR
KIDS THAT DIED.
THOSE WHO ARE FIGHTING FOR OUR
WE ARE HEARING A PRAYER FOR
FREEDOM.
THOSE WHO ARE FIGHTING FOR OUR
THAT'S WHY I AM ENORMOUSLY
FREEDOM.
HAPPY.
THAT'S WHY I AM ENORMOUSLY
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, HOLDOUTS
HAPPY.
TAMARA AND OLGA ARE JOURNEYING
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, HOLDOUTS
TO A MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE CHURCH
TAMARA AND OLGA ARE JOURNEYING
IN A NEARBY TOWN, THAT HAS
TO A MOSCOW PATRIARCHATE CHURCH
WELCOMED THEM AND ALSO THEIR
IN A NEARBY TOWN, THAT HAS
PRIEST.
WELCOMED THEM AND ALSO THEIR
IT CAN BE SEEN ACROSS THE VALLEY
PRIEST.
FROM THE LITTLE BLUE CHURCH OF
IT CAN BE SEEN ACROSS THE VALLEY
ST. NICOLAS, ONE MORE DIVISION
FROM THE LITTLE BLUE CHURCH OF
IN A NATION AT WAR.
ST. NICOLAS, ONE MORE DIVISION
THIS IS KIRA KAY IN WESTERN
IN A NATION AT WAR.
UKRAINE.
>> Sreenivasan: PUBLIC SCHOOLS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY ARE
TRANSITIONING TO THE
COMMON CORE, A SET OF NEW
ACADEMIC STANDARDS IN MATH AND
LANGUAGE ARTS.
BUT INCREASINGLY, PROTESTS TO
THEM HAVE GOTTEN LOUDER THIS
YEAR, AND SOME STATES ARE EVEN
RETHINKING THEIR DECISIONS.
WITH A LITTLE HELP FROM
HOLLYWOOD, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN TULENKO OF LEARNING MATTERS
HELPS BREAK DOWN WHERE THINGS
STAND AT YEAR'S END.
>> Reporter: 1950s HOLLYWOOD
DRAMA TELLS A STORY OF A LIFE
BET OF SURVIVORS OF A SHIP
WRECK.
TOO FULL, TURNS OUT
>> CAN'T SAVE ALL YOUR LIVES.
THERE ARE TOO MANY PEOPLE IN
THIS BOAT!
>> Reporter: TO KEEP THE
CROWDED LIFEBOAT FROM SINKING,
SOME HAVE TO GET TOSSED
OVERBOARD
>> I HAVE TO LET YOU GO
NOT ME!
LET ME STAY!
>> Reporter: THE DILEMMA OF
THE OLD FILM, WHO STAYS ON
BOARD, WHO GETS THROWN OVER,
THAT'S A GREAT WAY TO THINK
ABOUT THE COMMON CORE THESE
DAYS.
IT WAS LAUNCHED IN 2008, A
LIFEBOAT FULL OF BIG IDEAS TO
SAVE PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
BUT OUT ON OPEN SEAS, IT'S HAD
TO TOSS ASIDE KEY PARTS OF THE
PLAN JUST TO STAY AFLOAT AND THE
WATER IS GETTING ROUGHER.
>> NO MORE COMMON CORE!
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO A
RECENT SURVEYS, 60% OF AMERICANS
DON'T WANT TEACHERS TO FOLLOW
THE COMMON CORE.
>> THEN I LOOK AT THE PROBLEMS
AND IT'S LIKE BILL HAS THREE
GOLDFISH, HE BUYS TWO MORE, HOW
MANY DOGS LIVE IN LONDON?
>> Reporter: TO HELP US
NAVIGATE THESE TROUBLED WATERS,
WE'VE TURNED TO THREE EXPERTS.
NEIL OF THE CONSERVATIVE CATO
INSTITUTE.
>> CLEARLY, THE PUBLIC OPINION
OF THE COMMON CORE HAS MOVED
AGAINST IT, ESPECIALLY IF YOU
USE THE TERM COMMON CORE.
>> Reporter: CHRIS, WHO MADE
THE COUNCIL OF CHIEF STATE
SCHOOL OFFICERS, THE GROUP WHO
HELPED WRITE COMMON CORE.
>> GIVEN THE AMOUNT OF ATTENTION
ON THE NEGATIVE SIDE, IT IS
AMAZING TO ME WE'RE AT A PLACE
WHERE WE STILL HAVE ALL OF THE
STATES BEING WILLING TO WORK
TOGETHER.
I THINK IT'S A SIGN OF
STRENGTHENING OF STANDARDS.
>> Reporter: AND KATHERINE OF
EDUCATION WEEK WHO HAS BEEN
FOLLOWING THE JOURNEY FROM THE
START.
>> THERE'S DIFFERENT STRIPE OFS
CRITICISM AND MUCH OF IT HAS
BEEN NOT ABOUT THE CONTENT BUT
HOW THE STANDARDS CAME ABOUT.
>> Reporter: COMMON CORE STATE
STANDARDS WERE CREATED TO RAISE
THE BAR FOR EVERYONE, DEVELOPED
BY THE STATE'S GOVERNORS AND
OTHERS, NOT THE FEDS, AND THE
EXPECTATION WAS THAT STATES
WOULD ADOPT THEM VOLUNTARILY.
THAT IDEA WAS THE FIRST TO GO
WHEN STATES WERE SLOW TO SIGN
ON.
>> WE'VE GOT THE ACT NOW.
>> Reporter: IN 2009,
WASHINGTON GRABBED THE HELM
THROUGH WHAT IT CALLED THE RACE
TO THE TOP.
STATES THAT AGREED TO A LIST OF
REFORMS INCLUDING HIGH STANDARDS
COULD WIN A SHARE OF 4.3 BILLION
IN FEDERAL EDUCATION FUNDS.
THIS AT THE HEIGHT OF THE GREAT
RECESSION.
>> FIRST, LET'S START WITH THE
BIG PICTURE.
>> Reporter: 45 STATES SIGNED
ON TO COMMON CORE.
>> AND THE BACKLASH CAME BECAUSE
SUDDENLY IN 2011 AND 2012,
DISTRICTS GET CONFRONTED WITH
THESE NEW STANDARDS AND THEY
SAY, WHAT ARE THESE?
WHERE DID THEY COME FROM?
I'M LOOKING AT THE MATH, IT
DOESN'T MAKE SENSE.
HOW COME I'M HEARING GOOD
LITERATURE IS BEING THROWN OUT?
SO WE MOVED TO A SYSTEM OF
NATIONAL STANDARDS WITHOUT EVER
HAVING HAD A MEANINGFUL,
NATIONAL DEBATE ABOUT DOING
THAT.
>> Reporter: AND THEN WHEN THE
STANDARDS REACH SCHOOLS, THE
BOAT WAS ROCKED BY THE SUDDEN
CHALLENGE OF GTINGET TEACHERS
EQUIPPED AND READY.
>> THERE'S AN INCREDIBLE LOOK
AND I'VE SEEN SOME OF IT BUT IN
A LOT OF PLACES WE'VE SEEN IT
SHOWN UP IN THE POLLS.
TEACHERS ARE NOT GETTING WHAT
THEY NEED AT ALL.
>> Reporter: INCLUDING BOOKS
AND CURRICULUM ALIGNED WITH THE
COMMON CORE, WHY LARGE NUMBER OF
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS HAVE
JUMPED SHIP.
>> 41% OF TEACHERS IN FAVOR, 44O
SUPPOSED.
SO DEPENDING ON WHICH STATES
YOU'RE IN, THERE ARE STATES WHO
HAVE GREAT IMPLEMENTATION
STORIES WHERE TEACHERS ARE
POLLING MUCH HIGHER THAN THOSE
YOU MENTIONED EARLIER, AN IN THE
PLACES WHERE IT'S NOT, WE NEED
TO MAKE SURE WE TAKE THAT AND
SOLVE THE PROBLEMS.
QUITE FRANKLY, THIS IS GOING
WELL ACROSS THE COUNTRY RIGHT
NOW.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE IS ONE
THING TEACHERS ALMOST
UNANIMOUSLY OPPOSE.
>> WHERE WE'VE SEEN A BIG CHANGE
IN OPPOSITION TO COMMON CORE IS
NOT TO THE STANDARDS THEMSELVES,
IT'S TO THE TESTING AND
ACCOUNTABILITY THAT'S CONNECTED
TO IT.
>> AND THE TESTS ARE IN THE
SPRING AND A LOT OF TEACHERS
FEEL LIKE WE'RE BARELY GETTING
OUR CURRICULUM AND TESTS.
>> YOU WILL VALUE TEACHERS BASED
ON IT, REWARD TEACHERS, VALUE
SCHOOLS BASED ON IT, SO A LOT OF
TEACHERS AND ESPECIALLY
STATE-LEVEL YOU KNOWOUS HAVE
SAID WE DON'T LIKE THE COMMON
CORE BECAUSE OF ALL THE
RAMIFICATIONS ATTACHED TO IT.
>> Reporter: SHARP CRITICISM
FROM TEACHERS FORCED U.S.
SECRETARY OF EDUCATION ARNE
DUNCAN, ARGUABLY, THE SHIP'S
CAPTAIN, TO ALTER COURSE.
>> WE THINK MANY STATES WANT TO
TAKE THE PRECIOUS OFF TEACHERS
WHO ARE WORKING EXTRAORDINARILY
HARD THIS YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE SECRETARY
BELATEDLY OFFERED STATES
ONE-YEAR REPRIEVE FROM USING
COMMON CORE TEST SCORES TO
EVALUATE TEACHERS.
EVEN STATES ARE BACKING AWAY.
OF THE 45 WHO STARTED, 14 HAVE
THROWN COMMON CORE TESTS
OVERBOARD IN FAVOR OF DEVELOPING
THEIR OWN.
>> MANY CITED THE COSTS OF THE
TEST.
THE ULTIMATE GOAL IS TO HAVE
THEM BEING ONLINE.
THAT'S EXPENSIVE.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE THE BAND WIDTH,
THE COMPUTERS.
A LOT ARE CONCERNED WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN SOMETHING GOES WRONG ON
TEST DAY.
THE OTHER THING IS POSSIBLE THEY
DROPPED OUT OF THE TEST BECAUSE
THEY KNOW IF YOU LEAVE THE TEST
YOU'RE ESSENTIALLY LEAVING
COMMON CORE, AND IF YOU CONTROL
YOUR OWN TEST, YOU CAN SET YOUR
OWN PROFICIENCY SCORES AGAIN.
>> THAT'S MAKES THEM NERVOUS.
ANYTIME MORE KIDS DON'T MEET THE
PROFICIENCY MARK, IT'S A
POLITICAL VERY DIFFICULT
POSITION FOR STATES.
THEY HAVE TO TELL PEOPLE ARE OUR
KIDS GETTING DUMBER?
WHY ARE OUR KIDS NOT PERFORMING
WELL?
ARE WE RAISING EXPECTATIONS?
BUT IT'S HARDER, TOUGH
POLITICALLY.
>> Reporter: THERE'S WITHIN
REASON THE MANY STATES HAVE
HELPED COMMON CORE STAY AFLOAT
IN TREACHEROUSLY POLITICAL
WATERS.
>> COMMON IN, DARLING!
>> Reporter: 25 HAVE DROPPED
THE NAME.
>> EVER HEARD OF THE NEXT
GENERATION CONTENT STANDARDS AND
OBJECTIVES?
>> NO, BUT I'M NOT SURPRISED
THAT SOMEONE CAME UP WITH THAT
NAME.
>> Reporter: IS THIS
REBRANDING?
>> SURE, IT IS.
STATES RECOGNIZE THAT THIS IS
TRICKY STUFF.
SO, YES, SOME STATES HAVE
RENAMED, SOME HAVE REWRITTEN.
SOME HAVE BAILED.
>> Reporter: OF THE 45 STATES
AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
THAT ORIGINALLY SIGNED ON,
NORTH CAROLINA, TENNESSEE,
MISSOURI AND GEORGIA ARE
REWRITING COMMON CORE STANDARDS.
INDIANA AND OKLAHOMA HAVE OPTED
OUT, WITH SOUTH CAROLINA TO
FOLLOW NEXT YEAR.
BUT THAT STILL LEAVES 38 STATES
MORE OR LESS ON COURSE.
>> THIS IS TO BE EXPECTED
BECAUSE AS YOU RAISE THE
EXPECTATIONS ON ANY SYSTEM,
THERE WILL BE PAIN POINTS.
BUT I THINK WE'VE WEATHERED THE
STORM.
>> WE'RE ALIVE.
>> Reporter: THE BOAT HASN'T
LANDED SAFELY YET AND THIS
SPRING'S COMMON CORE TESTS COULD
PRODUCE ANOTHER STORM.
JOHN TULENKO IN NEW YORK,
REPORTING FOR THE "NewsHour".
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, A SECOND
LOOK AT LAND DISPUTES IN THE
AMERICAN WEST.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY OF A
SPLIT OVER HOW TO ENJOY AND
EXPERIENCE NATURAL BEAUTY.
STRETCH A HIGH-TECH NYLON LINE
SOME 400 FEET ABOVE A CANYON
NEAR MO AB, UTAH.
>> IT'S TIGHT.
>> Brown: STRAP ON A HARNESS.
GOING BAREFOOT ON A LINE IN
BETWEEN THE TWO.
>> Brown: AND STEP OUT INTO
THE AIR.
IT'S CALLED HIGH LINING, IN THE
ON PUBLIC LANDS, A PERFECTLY
LEGAL ACTIVITY THAT MOST OF US
INCLUDING YOUR CORRESPONDENT WHO
STAYED FAR BACK FROM CLIFF'S
EDGE WOULD NEVER DREAM OF
UNDERTAKING.
>> I'M ALWAYS A LITTLE NERVOUS
NO MATTER HOW MANY I DO.
>> Brown: BUT HALEY AND HE DO
THIS SEVERAL TIMES A WEEK.
>> YOU ARE FORCED TO FOCUS.
I'M THINKING ABOUT THE ANCHOR AT
THE OTHER SIDE, HOW BAD I WANT
TO GET THERE, HOW LONG IT'S BEEN
SINCE I TOOK MY LAST STEP, WHEN
I'LL TAKE THE NEXT AND WHAT MY
FOOT FEELS LIKE ON THE LINE.
>> IT'S A RUSH OF OVERWHELMING
HAPPINESS BECAUSE YOU HAVE DONE
SOMETHING YOU WERE TERRIFIED AND
OVERCAME THAT FEAR AND THEN ALL
OF A SUDDEN YOU'RE PROUD OF
YOURSELF, YOU KNOW, YOU FEEL
EMPOWERED, LIKE YOU CAN DO
ANYTHING, REALLY.
>> Reporter>> Brown: IN HIGH LIY
WALKERS ARE TETHERED TO THE
LINE.
AS THIS VIDEO OF SCOTT ROGERS
SHOWS, THAT'S NOT THE CASE IN
OTHER SPORTS LIKE BASE JUMPING
IN WHICH JUMPERS LAUNCH
THEMSELVES OFF STATIONARY
OBJECTS LIKE CLIFFS AND PULL A
PARACHUTE AT THE KEY MOMENT.
TIMING IS EVERYTHING.
THE ROOM FOR ERROR VERY SMALL.
ROGERS AND ASHBURN KNOW PEOPLE
WHO HAVE DIED WHEN THE WIND BLEW
THEM BACK INTO THE CLIFF OR
THEIR PARACHUTE WAS OPENED TOO
LATE.
BUT THAT DOESN'T STOP THEM AND
CERTAINLY DOESN'T STOP THEM FROM
CAPTURING THEIR EXPLOITS ON
VIDEO AND POSTING THEM ONLINE.
>> I LOVE SPREADING THE JOY
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE WE KNOW THE
SECRET ABOUT LIFE, ABOUT WHEN
YOU DO THINGS THAT ARE SCARY AND
YOU OVERCOME YOUR FEARS, NOT
ONLY IS IT THE MOST FUN YOU WILL
EVER HAVE, BUT I
EMPOWERING AND CHANGES THE WHOLE
REST OF YOUR LIFE.
DOING WHAT WE'RE DOING, MAKING
MEDIA IS OUR GOAL FOR SURE.
>> IT'S TAKING SOMETHING THAT'S
PART OF OUR LIFE AND THEN
SHOWING IT TO THE WORLD AND
SAYING, HEY, LOOK, YOU CAN HAVE
FUN DOING THINGS YOU DIDN'T EVEN
REALIZED EXISTED.
>> Brown: THERE'S ANOTHER WAY
OF LOOKING AT AND BEING A PART
OF THE EXTRAORDINARY LANDSCAPE,
ONE THAT'S QUIETER, CALMER, AND
SEES THE BEAUTY, DRAMA AND
EXTREMES IN THE LAND ITSELF.
THE RED ROCK WALLS, TOWERING
SPIRES, WINDER RIVERS, PLUNGING
CANYONS.
IN THIS WAY OF EXPERIENCING THE
WILDERNESS, THE LONG WALK, THE
LIGHT FOOTPRINT, THE
CONTEMPLATION OF MAN'S SMALL
PART IN THE UNIVERSE TAKE
PRECEDENCE.
>> THE QUESTION IS WHAT SORT OF
LAND PROTECTION DO YOU WANT AND
WHAT SORT OF ETHIC DO YOU WANT
TO EVOLVE WITH THE YOUNGER
GENERATION.
PART OF WHAT THE STRUGGLE IS NOW
IS FOR QUIET USERS TO HAVE THE
SPACE THEY NEED.
>> Brown: COLORADO HISTORIAN
AND NATURE WRITER ANDREW GUL
GULLFORD SAYS CULTURAL SHIFTS IN
HOW PEOPLE VIEW THE OUTDOORS
RAISED IMPORTANT NEW QUESTIONS.
>> WE HAVE A LONG TRADITION OF
PUBLIC LAND USE IN THE AMERICAN
WEST.
THE NEW KINDS OF OUTDOOR
ACTIVITIES, THOUGH, THE EXTREME
SPORTS ACTIVITIES, THERE'S NOT A
LOT OF NATURE INVOLVED, SO
TODAY'S GENERATION IS TREATING
THE OUTDOORS AS A DIRTY GYM, AND
THAT'S NOT WHAT WAS THOUGHT
ABOUT 50 YEARS AGO WITH THE 1964
WILDERNESS ACT, WITH THE WILD
AND SCENIC RIVERS ACT.
SO THOSE CONSERVATION LAWS WERE
ABOUT PRESERVING NATURE FOR
NATURE'S SAKE, AND WE'VE GOT A
NEW GENERATION OF EXTREME SPORTS
ENTHUSIASTS WHO SIMPLY WANT TO
GO OUT, USE THE OUTDOORS,
PHOTOGRAPH THEMSELVES WITH, YOU
KNOW, SPECIAL LITTLE CAMERAS,
AND HIT THE BLUE POD BY DARK AND
TALK ABOUT THEIR EXPLOITS.
>> Brown: THERE'S BEEN MUCH
TALK ABOUT THIS PARTICULAR
EXPLOIT, THE PERO SWING AT
CORONA ARCH, AN ICONIC LANDMARK
JUST OUTSIDE YOU TUBE VIDEO PUT2
HAS MORE THAN 20 MILLION VIEWS
ONLINE.
IT ALSO GOT THE ATTENTION OF THE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF NDLA
MANAGEMENT WHICH RECENTLY HAS
TAKEN OVER THE ARCH FROM THE
STATE OF UTAH IN A LAND SWAP AND
WHICH ADMINISTERS SO MUCH OF
THIS STATE AND OTHER PARTS OF
THE WEST.
>> AND IT'S CREATED OVER TIME.
>> Brown: MEGAN CRANDALL IS A
B.L.M. SPOKESWOMAN.
WE LEARN ABOUT THIS ON VIDEOS,
HOW DO YOU LEARN ABOUT IT?
>> THE SAME WAY YOU DO.
>> Brown: WHAT'S YOUR
REACTION?
>> HOLY COW.
THAT'S INCREDIBLE.
>> Brown: WHAT HAPPENS?
YOU HAVE TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
MANAGE THIS.
>> RIGHT.
CERTAINLY WE HAVE A
RESPONSIBILITY TO MANAGE FOR
SOME OF THESE NEW USES.
AS WE'VE SEEN WITH THESE
ACTIVITIES, IT'S A FIRE STORM.
IT TOOK OFF, GAINED IN
POPULARITY AND WE SAW THE USAGE
SURGE.
>> Brown: THE SURGE INCLUDED
ONE DEATH AND ONE SERIOUS INJURY
BY ROPE SWINGERS WHO MISJUDGED
HOW LONG THEIR ROPES NEEDED TO
BE.
RANDAL SAYS BLM POLICY IS PEOPLE
USE PUBLIC LANDS AT THEIR OWN
RISK BUT THE AGENCY LOOKS AT A
VARIETY OF FACTORS INCLUDING
DAMAGE TO THE ROCK AND THE
IMPACT ON THOSE WHO WANT TO
EXPERIENCE THE ARCH THE
OLD-FASHIONED WAY.
AND WHILE THEY STUDY THE
IMPACTS, FEDERAL OFFICIALS
PROPOSED A BAN ON ROPE
ACTIVITIES AT CORONA.
>> WE ARE PUTTING OUT FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT A SUGGESTION THAT WE
INSTITUTE A TEMPORARY TWO-YEAR
RESTRICTION ON ROPED ACTIVITIES
TO GIVE US THE TIME AND SPACE WE
NEED TO EVALUATE IF CONTINUING
TO ALLOW THE ACTIVITIES HERE IS
THE MOST APPROPRIATE USE OF THE
ARE MOAB MONKEYS, OF
COURSE, SAY THEY LOVE THE LAND,
TOO, AND ARE HAPPY TO SHARE IT.
>> SEEMS LIKE A LONG FLIGHT.
>> Brown: BUT HALEY ASHBURN
SAYS THERE ARE PLENTY OF PLACES
FOR THOSE WHO COMPLAIN ABOUT THE
EXTREME SPORTS.
>> THEY CAN GO TO ANY NATIONAL
PARK, I CALL THOSE NO FUN
ALLOWED ZONES.
>> Brown: NATIONAL PARKS?
YES, NICE AND QUIET, NOBODY'S
GOING TO BE BASE JUMPING, NOBODY
GOING TO BE SCREAMING AND
YELLING AND HAVING A REALLY
AMAZING TIME.
>> IT'S SOMETHING WE NEED TO
EXPLORE.
>> Brown: THE B.L.M.'S MEGAN
CRANDALL SUGGESTS THAT ARGUMENT
WORKS BOTH WAYS, THAT THERE'S AS
PLENTY OF ROOM FOR ROPED
ACTIVITIES IF THE BAN IS MUTT IN
AT CORONA ARCH.
>> THERE ARE OTHER PLACES WHERE
YOU CAN ENGAGE IN THE
ACTIVITIES, BUT AT LEAST FOR US,
WE WANT TO TAKETHE  TIME TO
REALLY THINK ABOUT WHETHER IT'S
APPROPRIATE FOR THOSE TO
CONTINUE HERE.
>> Brown: THE B.L.M. IS TAKING
PUBLIC COMMENTS ON TISSUE
THROUGH THE END OF THE MONTH.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BUREAU OF
LAND MANAGEMENT IS EXPECTED TO
ISSUE A DECISION REGARDING THE
TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF CORONA ARCH
IN EARLY JANUARY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY WE
LEAVE YOU WITH A STORY ABOUT
GIVING BACK.
CONNOR MORGAN, A HIGH SCHOOL
SENIOR AT JUDGE MEMORIAL
CATHOLIC HIGH SCHOOL IN SALT
LAKE CITY DONATES HIS TIME BY
SERVING THOSE WHO HAVE SERVED.
>> I DECIDED THAT I WANTED TO
VOLUNTEER AT THE V.A. BECAUSE
WHEN I'M OLDER I WANT TO BE A
DOCTOR, AND ALSO I REALLY LOVE
MILITARYHIST ORY.
SO VOLUNTEERING AT THE V.A. KIND
OF COMBINED MY TWO GREAT
INTERESTS, AND I ALSO JUST
WANTED TO GIVE BACK TO MY
COMMUNITY.
I WORK IN THE TRANSPORT OFFICE
AT THIS V.A. HOSPITAL AND THAT
ENTAILS TAKING PATIENTS TO
VARIOUS APPOINTMENTS THROUGHOUT
THE HOSPITAL.
THEY'RE ON WHEELCIRSHA, GURNEYS,
OR BEDS AND I ALSO PICK UP AND
DELIVER LAB SPECIMENS TO THE
BLOOD LAB.
>> JUST FLOW WITH THE TRAFFIC.
>> I MEAN, UNLESS YOU'RE IN A
RUSH.
>> NAH.
>> ALRIGHT.
I REALLY ENJOY HELPING HERE ARE
THE V.A.
I MEAN, AS WE ALL KNOW, VETERANS
HAVE DONE SO MUCH FOR US AND
MOST PEOPLE I DON'T THINK TRULY
BELIEVE THAT OR APPRECIATE THAT,
SO I WANTED TO DO SOMETHING TO
HELP THEM BACK.
SO THAT'S WHY I VOLUNTEER HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: TO SEE MORE
STORIES FROM OUR GIVING BACK
SERIES, PRODUCED BY SCHOOLS IN
OUR STUDENT REPORTING LABS
NETWORK, PLEASE VISIT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THIS CHRISTMAS DAY BROUGHT ALL
THE TRADITIONAL CELEBRATIONS,
AND A LAMENT FROM POPE FRANCIS
FOR VICTIMS OF EBOLA, TERROR AND
WARS.
HE TOLD A THRONG IN ST. PETER'S
SQUARE, "THERE ARE SO MANY TEARS
THIS CHRISTMAS."
THE FATHER OF A JORDANIAN
MILITARY PILOT, DOWNED IN SYRIA,
APPEALED TO ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS NOT TO HARM HIS SON.
THERE WAS NO RESPONSE FROM THE
GROUP.
AND HUNDREDS OF INDEPENDENT
THEATERS BEGAN SHOWING "THE
INTERVIEW", A COMEDY ABOUT A
PLOT TO KILL NORTH KOREA'S
LEADER.
SONY PICTURES INITIALLY CANCELED
ITS RELEASE AFTER THREATS FROM A
HACKERS GROUP.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, WE LOOK BACK 100 YEARS,
TO A UNIQUE MOMENT OF JOY AND
PEACE IN THE MIDST OF WORLD WAR
I, A LEGENDARY GAME OF SOCCER
BETWEEN BRITISH AND GERMAN
TROOPS DURING A CHRISTMAS CEASE-
FIRE.
SEE PHOTOS OF SOLDIERS PLAYING
DURING BREAKS FROM WAR.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND AGAIN, TO OUR HONOR ROLL OF
AMERICAN SERVICE PERSONNEL
KILLED IN THE AFGHANISTAN
CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, ARE THREE
MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT HOW
YOUNG PEOPLE GET THEIR NEWS.
PLUS WE'LL HAVE THE ANALYSIS OF
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND WE HOPE
YOU HAD A WONDERFUL AND PEACEFUL
CHRISTMAS.